the West has United in backing Israel
since Saturday's armed attack by Hamas
and Western governments have avoided
criticizing the Intensive Israeli
bombing of Gaza so how is Western policy
towards Israel and Palestine over
decades affecting the conflict today
this is Inside
[Music]
Story
hello there I'm James Bay the death toll
in the Gaza War continues to rise as
Israel pounds Palestinians with its
intensive bombing of densely populated
areas since Israel was founded in 1948
the United States has been its
staunchest Ally sentiments expressed by
the US president after Hamas gunman
killed hundreds of Israelis on Saturday
my commitment to Israel's security and
the safety of the Jewish people is
unshakable the United States has
Israel's back and we're going to be
working on this all through the day and
Beyond the UK is another of Israel's
strongest political and Military backers
and has pledged to continue with its
intelligence and security support we
already have a very longstanding
relationship with Israel we're one of
their strongest allies we've provided in
the past the T kinds of equipment that
they've used to defend themselves uh
over the past couple of days and as I
said to the Prime Minister we will
continue to provide whether that
diplomatic intelligence or security
support as they need shortly after
Saturday's attack the EU commission
president Ursula V deline was quick to
support Israel in a tweet she said I
spoke to my friend president Isaac
Herzog and conveyed to him my full
support to Israel in the face of today's
terrorist attack by Hamas I re reiterate
that Israel has the right to
self-defense the EU Mourns the victims
of these senseless attacks and stands by
Israel today and in the next
week the the US and the EU have also
provided financial and humanitarian
support to Palestinians but that's
coming under pressure and increased
scrutiny since the events last weekend
the Biden administration's provided
about half a billion dollars in funding
since most was frozen by the previous
president Donald Trump hours after the
attack by Hamas a European commissioner
declared more than $700 Million worth of
EU Aid to Palestinians would be cut but
the EU has since clarified that funding
will continue for
now
so now let's bring in our panel of
guests to discuss it all in Doha
Abdullah Al Arian associate professor of
history at Georgetown University in
katar he's a specialist on us Middle
East policy in Rome is Maria Louisa Fant
tapier head of Middle Eastern Africa
program for the Italian Think Tank
Instituto afari Internationale and in
Dublin is Richard Boyd Barrett a member
of the Irish Parliament with the people
before profit party a warm welcome to
you all right I would like to start with
you Abdullah if I can right at the
beginning and the basics perhaps no
surprise at all Israel is staunchly
being backed by the
US yeah I mean and as you say there's no
surprise really in this policy this is
something that has been part and parcel
of US foreign policy in this region for
quite some time but I would like to
focus on wa maybe what some of the
differences are I think what we're
seeing really over the course of the
past decade or so has been a complete
abandonment even of any pretense of big
becoming a so-called honest broker we
know the US never uh effectively managed
to offer uh you know the Palestinians of
course being um you know
completely uh you know denied their own
Liberation their own State there was a
thought in the 199s that the United
States could sponsor or process the the
so-called Oslo Accords as a means of
providing them with statehood but from
the very beginning I mean really going
back to the mid 90s it was very clear
that Israel had no intention of actually
delivering on this two two-state
solution and instead use that
opportunity of pacif from the
Palestinian side to double and triple
the number of settlements and so
expansion across all of the Palestinian
territories and then of course later on
once we get into the mid uh early to
mid-2000s we see this blockade of Gaza
beginning and the kind of encirclement
and besiegement of what is now over two
million people population and so I think
what's really distinct about the last
decade in particular you know going back
maybe to the late Obama periods who then
of course under Donald Trump who
everyone saw as being a kind of very
exceptional uh president as as one who
sort of says out loud what most US
policy makers would never dare to speak
is that he cared nothing whatsoever for
the plight of Palestinians he completely
circumvented and bypassed any demands
and kept them basically in the exact
same situation that they continued to be
in and instead focused on this idea of
normalization between Israel and a
number of Arab states all of whom of
course found mutual benefits in that
Arrangement under a kind of us Regional
security umbrella um and along with it
of course all of the major economic
benefits and so in the meantime the
Palestinian question was no longer even
on the back burner it simply didn't
exist there has been no discussion
whatsoever and then we get to the Biden
Administration and they simply inherited
the Trump foreign policy to the Middle
East we've seen no distinction between
what Trump was doing uh you know the
Biden Administration endorsed the move
of the US Embassy to Jerusalem which was
an incredible
volatile move and a and a very daring
move in a way in terms of upsetting what
had been seen at that point as being
something of a no-go because of the fact
that Jerusalem continues to be uh
considered occupied territory by the UN
by international law and then of course
we see this push to double down on the
normalization agreements between Israel
and now with Saudi Arabia which is kind
of the big fish in all of this so I
think there is something to be said
about the fact that US policy has gotten
even more staunchly um you know in in
opposition to any notion that there
should be anything of a settlement for
Palestinians who continue to be
stateless and and very much um stuck in
this kind of apartheid situation Maria
um let me just ask you you could say
what we're seeing on our screens is what
we've seen play out many times before in
Gaza but there are big differences too
the scale of the Israeli casualties the
largest loss of of life and an attack in
the country's history the tactics that
were used by mass and also how important
do you think is the fact that this time
there are captives inside
Gaza no definitely I mean this is uh
something uh that is quite unprecedented
and
uh in terms of like the level of uh
infiltrations within like the the
Israeli territory and I think to a
certain extent it's a it's something
that came also as a shock to the
Western and European public
opinion and this is why also there has
been such sort of schizophrenic
responses also from the EU institution
to a certain extent because the level of
the violence has been so uh shocking to
the public that then this has created a
very emotional response to a certain to
a certain extent and
um definitely uh the you has been always
uh like supporting the idea of the
two-state solution but I think that uh
the problem has been that the first uh
the first responses were actually much
more uh inclined towards showing
solidarity towards Israel which is
normal but however I think there has
been a mismanagement in the
communication also because uh this has
created some confusion on what actually
on where the EU stands Vis A of of this
conflict um so a lot of emotions and a
little attention I think for the what
has been the EU strategy towards this
conflict for for many year in terms of
EU approach and EU responses in the
early days of this
conflict Richard you are also in an EU
Capital like Maria um I want to come
back to the EU if I may does that
emotion that Maria talks about does that
explain the fact that early White House
statements seem to lack any of the usual
cuse calls for proportionate response or
exercise of
restraint yes um I think that is the
case
and uh I mean take for example our
Minister for foreign affairs yesterday
where he was being interviewed as I was
uh on the radio and he felt able to say
that Israel was acting in self-defense
uh so when he was questioned about
Israel's threats to uh starve Gaza and
all its population of water of energy of
uh
food he he he could use terminology like
self-defense and obviously I you know I
challenge that very very strongly and
said that this was not self-defense and
the threat to collectively punish 2.2
million people to uh you know bombard
with massive artillery strikes um the
most densely
populated residential area in the world
were war
crimes uh it it they if you like we
those who were speaking on behalf of
Palestinians were being put on the
defensive uh so I think there's the
United States and Israel feel emboldened
to be able to act with greater impunity
than they might
otherwise uh feel um and uh we're seeing
that you know with the
extraordinary explicit and Brazen Threat
by Israel to commit and indeed they've
started to commit war crimes um in front
of the eyes of the world and say
explicitly that what they're going to do
which is by any de definition is a war
crime that they're just going to do it
anyway and the United States stands
firmly behind them and many if not most
of the European union leaders uh equally
sort of giving legitimacy to what Israel
is doing so it really is shocking when
of course the truth of the matter is
that uh what happened and it you know
the loss of life is terrible and
everybody is is opposed by this
escalation of violence but certainly I
think I feel and many people would feel
none of what happened at theend could
have happened were it not for a 177e
long Siege on Gaza the extraordinary
sort of escalation of the war on the
Palestinians by the Israeli this
particularly vicious Israeli government
uh of Netanyahu smotrich and Ben giver
but that is that is the real context uh
is the is the ongoing crimes against
humanity being committed against the
Palestinians but there is no doubt that
uh Israel feels emboldened at the moment
as do its major backers so Richard has
just laid out the narrative as he sees
it in the context there Abdullah but
just tell us a bit about how this is
seen in the US because you study the US
and its policy towards the Middle East I
mean I watch Us Media as well in fact I
I I live most of the time in New York
although I'm currently in Doha 22 US
citizens killed 17 missing and may be
held prisoner do you think the prisoner
part of it and the world word hostage is
the one that's being used in the US
media do you think that perhaps explains
some of of of of of the reporting and
then some of the actions by the
administration well certainly I think
you know part of it is the media
coverage I think there's a narrative
that immediately takes hold the moment
events like this um you know happen and
that narrative tends to in in a kind of
a very uh one-dimensional way you know
paint one side as an aggressor paint one
side as victim and then erase all
history all context all even recent
events as if you know everything just
sort of occurs in this bubble in this
vacum on the day of of you know these
these horrific events and so I think can
I ask you can I ask you the historical
context of of hostage crisis I mean I'm
going a long way back to 1979 but in
fact um you know President Biden was one
of the closest supporters of President
Carter do you think that historical Echo
May perhaps explain why why the occupant
of The West Wing is pursuing the policy
he
is I don't know that that that would
necessarily be the connection I mean I
think in general there's been seen as
this massive support for Israel in
particular because let's not forget
there are Palestinian Americans that are
constantly being victimized that are
constantly being oppressed that are
being killed by Israel right we we know
the case of your colleague sharen abaka
who's a Palestinian American journalist
and if you look at uh all of the attempt
by the family to go and seek any kind of
Investigation on the part of the us into
her killing by Israel last year um there
was almost no response right and the US
Secretary of State who's now flying to
Israel to to have conversations about
the safety and return of Israeli
Americans could never do the same for
Palestinian Americans I think that's a
there's a fair question there as far as
why is this always been the case why is
there a double standard why are some
American citizen lives um you know worth
less than other others I think this is
this is certainly something that comes
out of a much deeper Affinity that the
US has always had with the state of
Israel irrespective of its actions
irrespective of as we've seen there's
now a growing International consensus
about the fact that there's an apartheid
system that's in place about the fact
that we've seen violence of this scale
um on multiple other occasions although
now certainly it's been ramped up even
further in in in large part because of
the US offering a kind of a green light
that we've never really seen um up to
this point and even in terms of the the
violence that we're seeing it's not just
in Gaza but even going into uh the West
Bank with some of the shooting sprees
that we're hearing about in terms of of
um you know Palestinians who are
essentially escaping some of these kinds
of Revenge attacks that we've seen so I
think that there's a there's a bigger
deeper context here that seems to be
ignored we don't hear about most of this
in the US media and public opinion and
sympathies have certainly aligned in a
very particular kind of way that is very
much in keeping with the longer standing
narrative the dehumanization a
Palestinians the idea that you can have
officials both in the US and in Israel
um make you know incredibly dehumanizing
racist genocidal remarks and it goes
completely un un uh responded to right
or the media does not make any kind of
an attempt to challenge any of those
narratives well let me bring that up
with Richard I mean some of the things
you probably heard uh from across the
Atlantic uh parallels with 911 Senator
Lindsey Graham we're in a religious war
and I unapologetically stand with Israel
at a news conference in recent hours the
US Secretary of State and the Israeli
Prime Minister saying Hamas is the same
as Dash or or isil whatever you call it
what do you make of all of that that
sort of
language yeah well I mean I think Abdul
is absolutely right I I mean I I think
public opinion over the last number of
years has
increasingly become aware of the the
apar nature of the Israeli regime of its
H its you know ongoing campaigns of
ethnic
cleansing uh it its disfunctional and
sort of uh abnormal character has been
highlighted by the Amnesty International
reports and Human Rights Watch reports
and other reports about the aparte
nature of that state um so on the one
hand Israel has been delegitimized in
the minds of millions of people but now
uh Israel and its backers feel they have
an opportunity to push back against all
of that and again as Abdullah said it's
like they start the clock of this story
at what happened over the weekend as if
there is no other
context uh and uh they rely on you know
the lack of knowledge or information or
awareness of the background and history
to all of this uh of of of significant
SE ctions of the public in the United
States and in Europe to kind
of you know ignore all of that history
uh so it it all just started at the
weekend now I think you know we all know
that's not true um in fact I will give
credit to the Irish president Mary
Robinson the former Irish president she
was being interviewed on the radio uh
just about an hour ago I was listening
to her and she was making the point that
during the summer she warned that if the
siege of Gaza was wasn't lifted if the
impunity Israel was enjoying in terms of
the ethnic cleansing the illegal
settlements the ongoing brutal
occupation if these matters were not
going to be addressed by the
International Community that she feared
and this was during the summer that we
were facing into a terrifying escalation
of violence an uncontrollable I think
escalation of violence and she was
absolutely right and that is the context
but of course
Israel the United States their backers
in Europe want to
pretend that there was no history to all
of this and it All Began uh with the
events of the weekend and they are
trying to use that then to justify an
even more Savage uh escalation of the
war on Gaza and on the Palestinians
generally Maria I'd like to put to you
the point that Abdullah made earlier on
that this is a complete indictment of
the Biden strategy on the Israeli
Palestinian conflict which seems to have
been as he said a continuation of the
Trump strategy and it basically was to
ignore the Palestinians to go around the
Palestinians try and get an economic
peace um with Arab countries um what's
your view of how that strategy has
played out I think that it has played
out in a tragic uh way in the sense that
uh despite definitely there are local
causes to this conflict that is latent
is ongoing from several decades
however there is a regional context in
which this attack took place and the
regional context is uh one which for
several weeks and for several months
there has been enormous pressure exerted
by by Washington on uh on Saudi Arabia
and uh on the gulf in general but on
Saudi Arabia in particular to obviously
go ahead with this normalization deal so
um which if uh between Saudi Arabia and
Israel so if this uh normalization deal
um which could have happened against
Saudi Arabia receiving a certain amount
of military uh uh military uh
infrastructure if this deal would have
happened obviously the Palestinian issue
would have been I think obliterated
completely from the uh from the from the
discussion because despite the Saudi
wish or uh statements that they wanted
to deliver something on this it seems to
be that actually in Tel Aviv there was
no in Jerusalem there was no actually
wishes from the netan government to
actually deliver anything on this so the
Israelis obviously were convinced that
the Saudis could be okay just with with
the military deal the Washington
administration probably thought the same
and that obviously has created a push
back it has created a push back I
believe not only
uh from local movements like Hamas but
also I think from uh many other Regional
players who did not want this C to
disappear from the debate so I think
that the am the attack of amas in some
way re brings back the Palestinian issue
at the very center of the regional
equilibrium at the moment in which it
risks to be totally um deleted but it is
important to say that part of this
tragic event is also I think the
indirect and even uh indirect result of
a US strategy which really forced the
hand of this normalization and didn't uh
understand that in order to to achieve
normalization you needed time you needed
concession but they didn't have time
because there was the presidential
election and they didn't want to um make
concession or they didn't want to
pressure the Israeli government to make
concession it seems and so the result
has been obviously a push back so I
think that somehow if you compare this
approach with what we have seen over the
past months the Chinese approach which
has been that one of trying to actually
um bro break broke a deal between
Regional Rivals such as Saudi Arabia and
Iran it almost comes to the point of
saying that the Chinese strategy has
been in so far maybe more successful so
uh I think that really there is a lot of
rethinking of how Washington moves uh
when it comes to uh to normalization I
think that normalization could be
possible but not without some steps
forwards on the Palestinian issue which
is substantial step forwards Abdullah we
see secretary blinkin in the region now
um he's not looking at the big picture
he's showing support for Israel but he's
also focusing and we he talk about
humanitarian cor corridors and passage
there's already been detailed
negotiations we understand between the
Israelis and the Egyptians and the US
now reported that the secretary of state
will be coming to Qatar
um but I'm also hearing reports that
Egypt's not allowing a mass movement of
people into its territory could we be
looking at as some sort of deal where
dual Nationals us Nationals we think
they're about five or 600 are allowed
out out of Rafa and the rest of the
population of Gaza gets stuck there
I mean I I don't think we have any
indication of that as of yet that
there's a specific concern for for US
citizens there certainly there hasn't
been over the course of almost a week of
of incessant carpet bombing of the
entire territory of Gaza um you know I
and I think in terms of what the
response has been for people who have
attempted to go to the border of course
we've seen um you know instances of of
Israel actually bombing the crossing and
so people who were attempting to cross
at that point then there's also been of
course uh the denial by Israel and the
threats made that if Egypt were to try
to offer Aid to enter into Gaza that
they would also be bombing that those
eight convoys so you know there there
really is a question here about who even
controls uh the territory the border
between Gaza or Palestine and Egypt and
I think that's you know and there's
another point that I think is worth
considering which is going back to to
kind of the previous conversation about
the view of these normalization
agreements from the Arab side as as well
because I do think that that you know we
have transitioned from a period in which
you know many of the Region's rulers
would at least pay lip service to the
notion of the Palestine issue to the
point where it gets completely erased
and I think that's because the nature of
how legitimization of these regimes
happens has changed substantially in the
aftermath of the Arab Spring uprisings
and so now we're looking at over a
decade from that period in which many of
these governments are ruling their own
populations quite ruthlessly so it's not
surprising that they would not even
entertain the notion of of justice for
Palestinians and so I think this has
actually in some ways Eed the process by
these normalization deals can happen
Maria back to you we' seen the responses
of the US and the EU and on paper they
look very similar but do you think
within the EU Camp there is perhaps some
unease behind the scenes certainly
before the latest events over the last
18 months in my day job at the United
Nations speaking to EU politicians EU
diplomats who are who showing real
disart about the Israeli most right-wing
government and some of its
activities oh definitely there are
different me I mean different member
states have also different policies or
different approaches there has been
definitely a discomfort with uh the
netan government and the retrenchment of
democratic freedoms in Israel but I
think that overall there has been always
um I mean the discussion about uh
supporting the Israeli concerns when it
comes to security concerns of of Israel
this is is is something that is always
present but I think that the other
question to ask is more of what role for
the EU also in this situation because
after this very confusing response where
one commissioner came out saying we will
have to cut the aid the develop the
humanitarian Aid to the pales
territories then you know there has been
um a going back to this position and say
no we will not and then so there has
been a very confusing response in the
first days I think that however now the
EU is in in the interest of the EU and
in the interest also of the United
States to really avoid um the
regionalization of this conflict and
therefore this is why such emotional
response uh and polarizing tone on the
conflict are not helping I think that
the EU should sort of
rethink its approach reinvest really
into the what has been like the
two-state solution idea but also and
most importantly on the idea of how to
um start the leveraging on those
Regional players especially in the golf
who actually do not want a
regionalization of the conflict engage
with them um and uh try to really um
sort of support a containment of this of
this conflict if we can say so and not
it's spread out across the reg let me
put that put that to Richard because you
are just one individual EU politicians
what should individual politicians what
should members of the public do very
quickly to end our
conversation well I I mean certainly
what I'm doing and others like mind are
trying to say in the face of people
being horrified at what they are looking
at this terrible escalation of violence
that we have to get to the root cause
that if if this is not going to get even
worse uh and continue forever uh that we
need to get to the root cause and uh in
my view and certainly what I have been
arguing very strongly and I think many
others are is that the root cause of
this is uh the aparte nature of the
Israeli State the colonialist nature of
the Israeli state that it is based on
the ethnic cleansing of the Palestinians
on the denial of their most basic rights
the rights to return uh the right to
self-determination uh that it is based
entirely on the ruthless uh brutal and
murderous suppression of Palestinian
rights and that this in the same way as
aparte South Africa was not
acceptable uh and a movement eventually
of resistance inside South Africa as
well as internationally finally led to
the dismantling of the uh that regime
that that is the only way we are going
to get peace and Justice uh in Palestine
thank you Richard thank you to all our
guests to Maria Louisa Vanier Abdullah
Al Aran and Richard Boyd Barrett a
fascinating conversation if you didn't
catch it all you can see it again on the
website al.com on this show we discuss
one of the main stories of the day so
I'm sure the ongoing war will be the
focus of our conversation for some time
to come do you have a comment on an
aspect of this story um anything you
want us to cover get in touch find our
Facebook page that's
facebook.com/ AJ Inside Story or on X
that's the one I still call Twitter
we're AJ insid story from me James Bay
and the team bye for
[Music]
now